http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/6637/5515

community-led initiative that is part of a broader social movement aiming toward a transition to an alternative way of living.

Most of these initiatives are motivated by desires to preserve natural resources and promote community resilience

They oppose the environmental and economic costs of hyperconsumption (Merrick, 2012) and attempt to encourage the establishment of sustainable and self-reliant communities in a future characterized by climate change and the effects of peak oil.

Cuando hemos consumido el 50% del petróleo del mundo, es cada vez más difícil extraer el 50% que queda y va cayendo la producción poco a poco.

esearch agenda focused on sustainable and resilient communities from an ecopolitical stance that regards sustainable communities as characterized by “hands-on, DIY politics, which may have the potential for actual transformation of local communities, preparing them practically for adapting to the twin challenges of peak oil and climate change” 

These activities and practices inform us about how computing contributes to incrementally enacting alternative ways of living (Merrick, 2012). We illustrate how eco-villagers at Ekoby make use of technological capital to form, activate, and/or mobilize other types of resources, i.e., human, social and moral capital. These resources in turn help develop and enhance the sustainability and resilience of the community.

While Ekoby members are intent on raising their awareness about many issues, their own everyday use of ICT is not one of these issues. Ekoby shows us that the path toward sustainability and community resilience can at times be contradictory, messy, fuzzy, and non-linear.

Ekoby’s members spoke of a personal need to change the current course of their way of living; they expressed a strong commitment to inspire others to enact social change consistent with living on a finite planet. Such a change entails not only transitioning between two contradictory ways of life — from mainstream Swedish lifestyles to an alternative based on ecological and communal premises — but also a transformation of the inner self 

Members reported that changes toward a sustainable way of life are linked to: 1) a personal need to reconnect with nature and others (i.e., “[a] desire to live closer to nature and being able to support myself, to some extent of soil”; 2) resisting urbanism, consumerism, and individualism (i.e., “[I wanted] to find a personal balance in relation to a highly individualized society”); and, 3) preparing for upcoming crises and collapse (i.e., [I decided to become a member because] “I was worried by the crises that society is going through and about the collapse of industrial civilization that is a likely consequence”).

They illustrate people’s need to go against the grain of society and enact change at personal and collective levels. The answers mirror a sense of distrust of the realism of political solutions, and of current Swedish politicians’ abilities to solve the problems we face. Political distrust and personal malaise can be understood as tensions that led community members to mobilize their moral capital (Stokols, et al., 2013). That in turn, brought them together to start creating a strategy for transitioning toward an alternative way of living.

Four main activities constitute the backbone of the community. These activities are: (1) Production and maintenance of the land and the infrastructure of the eco-village; (2) reskilling; (3) socializing; and, (4) strategizing. These activities are either public (open to everyone) or private (only for full members). Members join at least one work group: the cultivation group, the social group, the construction group, and the infrastructure group.

First, the most important use of ICTs for this group is for mobilizing social capital. More specifically, eco-villagers use ICTs primarily for coordinating collective activities among members. Coordinating activities are especially important when organizing work weekends, courses or public events. Hypothetically, the group could coordinate activities without using ICTs, but such an alternative would be more arduous in terms of time and energy. 

The use of ICTs contributes to the creation of a sense of togetherness that is reflected in messages sent for the purpose of reinforcing good will, confirming friendship or just expressing thankfulness to the community. ICTs are also used to spread information about events, petitions, and policies regarding the local village.

Second, ICTs are used for informing members about changes concerning the status of the eco-village’s natural and human-made environmental capital. For instance, a practice emerged in which members send text messages that included photos. Not every member attends every activity at Ekoby so text-based reporting practices contribute to keep members in the loop and assures continuity for a community that is dispersed.

Third, ICTs are used for following-up discussions started off-line, especially for issues related to visioning and strategizing the future of the eco-village. Such discussions mobilize values, beliefs, and meanings within the community. Messages sent through Google Groups often contain attached Microsoft Word documents, Microsoft Excel files with budgets, board meeting protocols, reflections are used to support the discussions on strategic issues during face-to-face formal meetings. In this respect, we might ask what it would be like to discuss strategic issues without using ICTs? One possible response could be that follow-up discussions would have been much more limited or that they might have been private among certain members and thus not public to all.

Fourth, the use of ICTs facilitates an important exchange of information about courses, articles, films, blogs, books, and seminars, contributing to members’ knowledge and reskilling. For instance, the construction of a house for the chickens was in part possible through the exchange of films, sketches, and drawings showing how others had constructed such a house with natural materials.

Fifth, only one percent of the messages analyzed targeted issues pertaining to the use of ICTs in the eco-village.

The impact of the Internet (along with the global infrastructure and the hardware of the digital devices in question) on our ecology is perhaps seen as too complex to be approached (i.e., none of the members knows very much about the inner workings of the Internet)? 

Eco-villagers’ silence about their use of ICTs raises questions about the absence of alternative communication and information practices in a community grounded by people constructing alternative ways of life.

The use of the Internet in the community creates conditions that enable community members to make transactions that translate into incremental changes toward community resilience. Through these transactions, the community activates, mobilizes and forms different forms of capital that we have chosen to denominate the Ekoby’s “sustainable capital”

capital that is produced from dynamic transactions among actors, assets and resources exchanged for the sustainability and resilience of the community. The forms of capital generated are local, socially bounded, non-transferable, renewable, re-created exclusively from the community’s collective work, and destined to be part of the community. This capital is thus sustainable because it is not borrowed, is created by and through the community, returns to the community, and exists as long the community continues to create it.

Merrick (2012), investigated the role of two online Web sites — Aussies Living Simply and Earth Garden Path — in promoting sustainability and simple living in Australia. She reports that these sites are “key to the ongoing process of situated learning that is vital to maintaining a sustainable lifestyle”. She also notes “while these sites play a significant role in contributing to people’s motivations or commitment to sustainable living, it is less easy to make a case for them as catalyst or primary influence”. This is an observation that illustrates well what we have observed at Ekoby; community members rely on the Internet as a means to achieve purposes that are deeply rooted in their will to change status quo, going against the grain of society and creating a more sustainable way of living. Their use of the Internet responds to individual and collective needs, as well as goals related to enacting social change. Members’ communication and information practices associated with the Internet do not work as a primary influence for the development of this type of intentional community.

Taking social practice theory as a starting point (Certeau, 1984; Shove, et al., 2012), we create, and are at the same time caught in a web that consists of our everyday practices. Since we have limited mental energy (Simon, 1991, 1957), we can and we do focus on a limited number of areas where we make conscious choices that can challenge our own preconceptions and behaviors. But, we also fall back on everyday routines and practices as we cannot change everything all at once. For Ekoby, areas that are challenged in comparison to societal norms are, for example, food provisioning (agriculture), transportation (cars), water (wells), electricity (solar cells), community matters (rules) and intellectual development in regards to issues such as “hard-core” sustainability, a critique of consumer society, self-sufficiency, societal collapse.

Many other topics that potentially could be framed in terms of “sustainability” lie in the shadows. They are not thought about or discussed. ICT is one. We have referred to it as an “ideological blind spot” elsewhere in this text.

Ekoby constructs a normality of its own, where some areas and topics are intensely discussed, while others go unnoticed or are ignored. We have shown that digital technologies play an important role for producing cohesion, coordination and strategizing at Ekoby. ICT technologies and the Internet can be represented as the “pinnacle” of industrial civilization and thus vulnerable to exactly those changes that Ekoby members worry about and prepare for. Despite this, Ekoby members apparently do not notice, or they discount or deny the impact of their communication and information practices on the environment and the implications of their reliance on these tools.

reactions of residents in a rural Norwegian community after the unusually warm winter of 2000–2001. While residents were highly educated, they perceived the phenomenon of global warning as both undeniable and at the same time unimaginable. Norgaard analyses their behavior in terms of “socially organized denial” — global warming is accepted, but it is still disconnected from residents’ everyday practices and everyday lives, despite having large effects on the local economy. We imagine that Ekoby members either are unaware of the connection between their use of ICT and sustainability, or alternatively, that ICT is so very useful in their everyday lives — including in their roles as Ekoby members — that they consciously or unconsciously have chosen not to think about it and “live in denial”. So, where does all this leave us then?


there are tensions between the values professed by groups of individuals striving to develop and support alternative ways of living and the realities of their communication and information practices enabled by the Internet.

Second, building sustainable capital through the use of the Internet raise questions about our own assertions of what contemporary sustainability practices should look like. Visions of contemporary sustainability practices as being “pure” are certainly unrealistic. Even communities that are genuinely engaged in enacting social change and contributing to the foundation of ecologically sustainable, resilient communities have their information and communication practices deeply enmeshed, with the use of ICTs.